Apart from individual privacy, big data have revived attention on the issue of ‘group privacy’.
This notion implies that privacy is not merely a right which should apply to persons, but likewise to social groups.
As Floridi observes, the value of privacy has been predominantly contrasted with that of (public) security: ‘Two moral duties need to be reconciled: fostering human rights and improving human welfare’.
He opposes the assumption, however, that the latter would be a political concern regarding the public at large and the former an ethical issue concerning individuals’ rights.
In the spirit of pragmatist ethics’ anti-dualism, i.e. its suspicion towards dichotomies, Floridi claims that a focus on these two positions of the individual and society overall is too simplistic.
Such a limited viewpoint ultimately overlooks aspects relevant to broader societal dynamics.
In consequence, the ethical debate lacks consideration for certain validity claims to normative rightness.
Not merely individuals, but likewise groups should be considered as holders of privacy rights.
This, according to Floridi, is increasingly of importance in an era of open and big data, since individuals (especially in their role as consumers) are commonly targeted as group members.
Balancing privacy and security is closely related to one of the tensions predominantly stressed in public health research and biomedical research more generally: safeguarding individual, civic rights versus public health and wellbeing as a common/public good.
With regards to genomics research, Hoedemaekers, Gordijn and Pijnenburg emphasise that ‘[a]n appeal to the common good often involves the claim that individual interests must be superseded by the common good.
This is especially the case when the common good is seriously threatened’.
To determine when a society may be ‘seriously threatened’ (e.g. by a disease) is however not always as clearly discernible as for instance in the case of epidemics/pandemics: for example, when it comes to preemptive measures such as coerced vaccinations.
Moreover, the response to a perceived threat depends on the respective understanding of values relevant to the ‘common good’.
In this sense, conceptualising data as contribution to the common good becomes a crucial factor in justifying their means of collection.
It is therefore particularly insightful and relevant to address how tech corporations take an interest in demonstrating how ‘their’ big data allow for insights beneficial to societies’ wellbeing – with (public) health being a widely acknowledged factor in this.
Open Data
One can observe controversies around the ‘trade off’ between privacy (commonly depicted as an individual right) and security (commonly depicted as a value related to public welfare, public interest and the common good) vividly with regards to governmental surveillance, as well as tech-corporate support of and acquiescence in such practices.
At the same time, transparency has been mobilised in claims to the normative rightness of big data practices.
Transparency indicates a high degree of information disclosure.
It implies openness regarding features and processes: for instance academic, governmental, corporate, or even private practices.
The notion is commonly linked to accountability.
With the concept of open data, transparency has been applied to big data as such: ‘Open data is data that can be freely used, re-used and redistributed by anyone – subject only, at most, to the requirement to attribute and share alike.’ .
The concept applies to data which are comprehensively accessible and technically as well as legally modifiable, allowing for re-use and distribution.