As Lupton points out: ‘While critical data studies often focuses on big data, there is also need for critical approaches to ‘small’ or personal data, the type of information that people collect on themselves.’ .
This criticism has now been partly addressed, thanks to Lupton’s own work as well as more recent contributions to CDS.
This requirement is likewise considered in this book, even though I argue that small, personal data are often inseparable from big, corporate data.
A main reason for this is that individuals’ potential to collect data individually is commonly tied to sharing commitments which are difficult or impossible to avoid.
On the one hand, we should not forget that corporate, governmental, and scientific big data practices predominantly rely on information generated by individuals.
On the other hand, these users should indeed not merely be ‘victimised’ – despite the importance of power asymmetries in big data utilisation.
Instead, one also needs to acknowledge those practices through which individuals engage critically and actively with data.
As mentioned at the beginning of this subchapter, CDS stresses the embeddedness of big and small data, and the need for context sensitivity.
In this sense, research in this field resembles sub-disciplines of digital media and internet studies, such as software studies, critical algorithm studies, and platform studies.
Software, platform, and algorithm studies all emphasise the need to analyse computational objects and practices, not merely as technical, but as social issues.
They highlight the necessity to look beyond matters of content and to investigate the interplay between technological intricacies and social, political, and economic factors.
This aim is often explicitly related to scholars such as Friedrich Kittler, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.
Kittler’s work is commonly cited, since he early on theorised the interplay between software and hardware, emphasising the need for a ‘proper understanding of the science and engineering realities that govern the highly fine-structured computer worlds in which we live’.
Fuller, among others, draws on Deleuze and Guattari’s work in arguing that ‘[...] software constructs ways of seeing, knowing, and doing in the world that at once contain a model of that part of the world it ostensibly pertains to and that also shape it every time it is used’.
Similarly, algorithms are described as ‘Foucauldian statements’ through which ‘historical existence accomplishes particular actions’.
More generally, software and algorithm studies alike are often linked to Foucault’s conception of power, not as force which is exerted on individuals or groups, but as a dynamic embedded in and permeating societies.
Similarly, such theoretical foundations tend to be crucial for the critical perspectives developed in CDS.
Critical Perspectives
Critical data studies is a field that acknowledges and reflects on the practices, cultures, politics and economies unfolding around data.
Issues addressed in this field may range from the abovementioned themes such as individuals’ privacy and autonomy, to data science ethics and institutional changes triggered by corporate or governmental funding invested in big data research.
All these perspectives have in common that they highlight the need for analyses of big data practices which are conscious of power relations, biases, and inequalities.
Likewise, they are open to an empirical engagement with societies permeated by digital data.